---
title: 'FOSDEM Junior Call for Participation'
---

Proposals for **FOSDEM JUNIOR** can now be submitted!

---MORE---

FOSDEM Junior is a specific track to organise workshops and activities for
children from age 7 to 17 during the FOSDEM weekend. These activities are for
children to learn and get inspired about technology and open source. 

We are looking for activities for children from age 7 to 17. These
activities are for children to learn and get inspired about technology.
Last year's activities included microcontrollers, game development,
embroidery, python programming, mobile application development, music,
and data visualization. If you are still unsure if your activity fits
FOSDEM Junior, feel free to reach out so we can assist you.

It is important for the children to remain inspired when they return
home. So make sure that you give the children something after your
activity. This can either be that they can continue working on their
project that they worked on during the activity, or in the form of
goodies or certifications. Also, if necessary, include information about
where the children and their guardians can find resources and tutorials
about your project. This is another step towards making sure they
continue their technical journey when they return home.

Each room has a maximum capacity of 48 seats, but will be capped at 30
children per activity by the organisers. This is to ensure there is
enough seating for both children and their guardians.

## Submission process

Please submit your proposals at [https://fosdem.org/submit](https://fosdem.org/submit)
by the 1st of December 2025. If you already have an account from a previous year, you 
should reuse it so all recorded FOSDEM contributions are associated with 
your profile.

When submitting your proposal, select 'Junior' from the track 
drop-down menu. Write the desired duration and maximum capacity into the 
proposal so we can take that into account when planning. Also, please 
include if you need additional volunteers available during your 
activity.


## Requirements

The conference language is English. All content must relate to Free and 
Open Source Software. By participating in the event you agree to the 
publication of your slides and other content provided under 
the same licence as all FOSDEM content (CC-BY). By participating in 
FOSDEM you are required to adhere the [Code of Conduct](https://fosdem.org/2025/practical/conduct/).

The FOSDEM junior track is not recorded.
